Good morning everyone! Welcome to Biology 201 Lab.
Today we'll be working with DNA extraction and gel electrophoresis.
Please make sure you have your lab coats and safety goggles on.
Do we need gloves for this experiment?
Yes, absolutely! DNA can be degraded by enzymes on your skin.
Everyone should have nitrile gloves at their stations.
I don't see any gloves at my station.
Check the drawer under your bench. They should be there.
Found them! What size should I use?
Use whatever fits comfortably. Medium is usually good for most people.
Now, let's go over the safety procedures.
We'll be using ethidium bromide, which is a mutagen.
What does that mean?
It means it can cause mutations in DNA, so we need to be very careful.
Never touch it with bare hands, and dispose of it properly.
How do we dispose of it?
There are special waste containers marked with biohazard symbols.
I'll show you where they are when we get to that step.
Now, let's start with DNA extraction from strawberries.
Why strawberries?
Great question! Strawberries are octoploid, meaning they have 8 copies of each chromosome.
This makes them an excellent source of DNA for extraction.
How many strawberries do we need?
One strawberry per group should be sufficient.
First, we need to break down the cell walls and membranes.
We'll use a buffer solution with detergent and salt.
What does the detergent do?
The detergent breaks down the lipid bilayer of cell membranes.
This releases the cellular contents, including DNA.
And the salt?
The salt helps precipitate the DNA and separate it from other cellular components.
Now, let's start the extraction process.
Place your strawberry in the plastic bag and add 10 mL of extraction buffer.
Should we mash the strawberry first?
No, add the buffer first, then seal the bag and mash gently.
We want to break up the tissue without creating too many bubbles.
How long should we mash it?
About 2-3 minutes should be sufficient.
You should see the mixture turn pink and become more liquid.
Mine is getting foamy. Is that okay?
That's fine, but try to be a bit gentler with the mashing.
Too much foam can make the next steps more difficult.
What's the next step?
We need to filter the mixture to remove large cellular debris.
Use the coffee filter and funnel provided.
How much should we filter?
Filter about 5 mL into a clean test tube.
The filtered solution should be clear with a slight pink tint.
Mine is still pretty cloudy. Should I filter it again?
Yes, you can try filtering it through a fresh filter.
Sometimes the first filter gets clogged with debris.
Now what do we do with the filtered solution?
Now we add cold ethanol to precipitate the DNA.
Add 5 mL of cold ethanol slowly down the side of the test tube.
Why does it need to be cold?
Cold ethanol helps the DNA precipitate more efficiently.
You should see white, stringy material forming at the interface.
I can see something white forming! Is that the DNA?
Yes! That's your extracted DNA. It should look like white threads or cotton.
Can we touch it?
You can use a glass rod to gently spool it out.
But remember to wear gloves and be very gentle.
What do we do with it once we have it?
We'll dissolve it in a small amount of water for the gel electrophoresis.
But first, let's make sure everyone has successfully extracted their DNA.
How do we know if it worked?
You should see white, stringy material that you can spool with a glass rod.
If you don't see anything, we can troubleshoot.
I think I got some! It's really stringy.
Excellent! That's exactly what we want to see.
Now let's move on to preparing the agarose gel.
What's agarose?
Agarose is a polysaccharide that forms a gel matrix.
It creates pores that allow DNA fragments to migrate through.
How do we make the gel?
We'll use pre-made gels today to save time.
But I'll explain how they're made: agarose powder dissolved in buffer.
What concentration should we use?
For DNA fragments of this size, 1% agarose is ideal.
Higher concentrations separate smaller fragments better.
Now, let's load our DNA samples into the gel.
How do we do that?
We'll use micropipettes to load the samples into the wells.
Each group should load 10 microliters of their DNA solution.
What if we don't have enough DNA?
We can dilute it with water, but let's see what you have first.
Once everyone has loaded their samples, we'll run the gel.
How long does it take to run?
About 30-45 minutes at 100 volts.
While it's running, I'll explain what we expect to see.
What should we see in the gel?
You should see bands of DNA that have migrated through the gel.
The smaller fragments will travel further than larger ones.
After staining with ethidium bromide, they'll fluoresce under UV light.
That sounds really cool!
It is! DNA electrophoresis is a fundamental technique in molecular biology.
It's used in DNA fingerprinting, genetic testing, and research.
Can we take pictures of our results?
Yes, but only after the gel has been properly stained and documented.
Remember to include your gel in your lab report.
When is the lab report due?
Next Friday at 5 PM. I'll post the guidelines online.
Make sure to include your gel image and explain your results.
Any questions about the procedure or the lab report?
I think I understand what we're doing.
Me too. The extraction was really interesting.
Great! Next week we'll be working with PCR amplification.
That's where things get even more exciting.
Have a great week everyone, and don't forget to clean up your stations!
Lab dismissed.